Edward Tufte's emphasis on simplicity and
minimalism has grown a great following.
He's largely seen as one of the most
influential writers on the topic of
visualizations for charts and graphs.
In his book, Beautiful Evidence,
he introduced the idea that took
minimalism in charts to a new level.
Instead of making a chart a separate
artifact to be studied on it's own,
he suggested it be reduced and
embedded within the context of discussion.
He argued that a small graph, say a time
series line graph, could convey so
much more information quickly that
it would be invaluable to readers.
He called these items sparklines and
referred to them as data words.
An intriguing way to bridge
the gap between text and figures.
He suggested that sparklines could not
only be represented directly in text, but
also could be embedded in tables
along with the data they describe.
This thought became so natural that it's
even been pick up by one of the most
common pieces of spreadsheet
analysis software, Microsoft Excel.
Here is a picture of tabular data
from the NASDAQ stock exchange,
showing the opening price of four
technology stocks over one-month period.
Take a moment to consider this data.
Which stock has had a bad
month with a downward trend?
And which has had a good
month with an upward trend?
What if I added sparklines
in the cells below?
Here you can see immediately that
Apple has had a poor month with
decreased stock price.
And IBM has had good month
with increasing stock prices.
With Amazon and Intel it's a little less
clear, and we see some spikes throughout.
Now these sparklines don't help us to
answer who has the highest stock price, or
who had the greatest wins or losses.
But they do give us a general feeling for
the trend behind the data.
And actually, sparklines are used for
data where trends or
distribution characteristics
are important.
Here's another example of sparklines
used in Google Finance's website.
Notice how you can actually quickly zoom
in on pieces of the distribution with
these sparklines.
So they're not just
a representation of the data but
a method of interacting with them.
There have been lots of
different uses of sparklines.
And customized interfaces,
such as video games, are a great example.
A modern take on sparklines,
which I think of as kind of neat,
is called the sparktweet.
Where Unicode block characters are used
to display a bar graph inside the 140
characters allotted by Twitter.
For instance,
here a user has tweeted her hours of sleep
over the month of April as a bar graph.
The last Tufte principle that I want to
share with you is one called lie factor.
Lie factor is the size of
an effect shown in the graphic
divided by the size of
the effect actually in the data.
It's often done unconsciously, to try and
help tell a narrative, however,
it's misleading to the observers.
There are lots of different
examples of lie factor.
This one from Time Magazine in 1979
provides a great example, I think.
In it, various barrels of oil are shown,
showing the price of oil over six years.
But it's unclear to the viewer what
the size of one barrel means in relation
to the others, in part because there's
an element of perspective here.
Are the barrels different sizes,
or do they just appear to be so
because some are in front of the others?
Is it the volume of the barrel that
represents the growth of the cost, or
the height of the barrel?
Sparklines and lie factor are just two
more tools that Edward Tufte has given us
to understand and communicate data.